[Documentation] Adding docs with test cases (#32)
pasqal-io/qadence-protocols: docs/error_mitigation/readout_mitigation.md

## Readout error mitigation

> Readout errors are introduced during measurements in the computation basis via probabilistic bitflips operators characterized by the Readout matrix defined over the system of qubits of dimension $2^n\times2^n$. The complete implementation of the mitigation technique involves using the characterized readout matrix for the system of qubits $(T)$ and classically applying an inversion  $(T^{−1})$ to the measured probability distributions. However there are several limitations of this approach:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Readout errors are introduced during measurements in the computation basis via probabilistic bitflips operators characterized by the readout matrix (also known as confusion matrix) defined over the system of qubits of dimension $2^n\times2^n$. The complete implementation of the mitigation technique involves using the characterized readout matrix for the system of qubits $(T)$ and classically applying an inversion  $(T^{−1})$ to the measured probability distributions. However there are several limitations of this approach:
```

- The correction is not rigorously justified, so we cannot be sure that we are only removing SPAM errors and not otherwise corrupting an estimated probability distribution.

Qadence relies on the assumption of _uncorrelated_ readout errors, this gives us:

$$
T=T_1\otimes T_2\otimes \dots \otimes T_n
$$

for which the inversion is straightforward:

$$
T^{-1}=T_1^{-1}\otimes T_2^{-1}\otimes \dots \otimes T_n^{-1}
$$

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="mitigation" result="json"
from qadence import QuantumModel, QuantumCircuit,hamiltonian_factory,kron, H, Z, I
from qadence.noise import Noise

# Simple circuit and observable construction.
block = kron(H(0), I(1))
circuit = QuantumCircuit(2, block)
n_shots = 10000

# Construct a quantum model and noise
model = QuantumModel(circuit=circuit)
error_probability = 0.2
noise = Noise(protocol=Noise.READOUT,options={"error_probability": error_probability})

noiseless_samples = model.sample(n_shots=n_shots)
noisy_samples = model.sample(noise=noise, n_shots=n_shots)

print(f"noiseless samples: {noiseless_samples}")
print(f"noisy samples: {noisy_samples}")
```

> Note that the noisy states have samples with the seconf qubit flipped. In the below protocols we describe ways to reconstruct the noiseless distribution (untarrgeted mitigation). Besides this one might just be interrested in mitigating the expectation value (targeted mitigation). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the noisy states have samples with the second qubit flipped. In the below protocols, we describe ways to reconstruct the noiseless distribution (untargeted mitigation). Besides this one might just be interrested in mitigating the expectation value (targeted mitigation). 
```

### Constrained optimization

However, even for a reduced $n$ the forth limitation holds. This can be avoided by reformulating into a minimization problem[^1]:

$$
\lVert Tp_{\textrm{corr}}-p_{\textrm{raw}}\rVert_{2}^{2}
$$

subjected to physicality constraints $0 \leq p_{corr}(x) \leq 1$ and $\lVert p_{corr} \rVert = 1$. At this point, two methods are implemented to solve this problem. The method involves solving a constrained optimization problem and can be computationally expensive.

> <!-- The first one relies on solving using standard optimization tools, the second on Maximum-Likelihood Estimation.  -->

Reviewer: Remove.

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="mitigation" result="json"

from qadence_protocols.mitigations.protocols import Mitigations
from qadence_protocols.types import ReadOutOptimization

# Define the mitigation method solving the minimization problem:
options={"optimization_type": ReadOutOptimization.CONSTRAINED, "n_shots": n_shots} 
mitigation = Mitigations(protocol=Mitigations.READOUT, options=options).mitigation()

# Run noiseless, noisy and mitigated simulations.
mitigated_samples_opt = mitigation(model=model, noise=noise)

print(f"Optimization based mitigation: {mitigated_samples_opt}")
```

### Maximum Likelihood estimation (MLE)

> This method replaces the costraints with additional post processing over the corrected probability distribution with negative entries. The runtime of the method is linear in the size of the distribution and thus is very efficient. The optimality of the solution is not always gauranteed. The method redistributes any negative probabilities on using the inverse operation equally and can be shown to maximize the likelihood with minimal effort[^2].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method replaces the constraints with additional post processing for correcting probability distributions with negative entries. The runtime of the method is linear in the size of the distribution and thus is very efficient. The optimality of the solution is however not always guaranteed. The method redistributes any negative probabilities on using the inverse operation equally and can be shown to maximize the likelihood with minimal effort[^2].
```

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="mitigation" result="json"

# Define the mitigation method solving the minimization problem:
options={"optimization_type": ReadOutOptimization.MLE, "n_shots": n_shots} 
mitigation = Mitigations(protocol=Mitigations.READOUT, options=options).mitigation()
mitigated_samples_mle = mitigation(model=model, noise=noise)
print(f"MLE based mitigation {mitigated_samples_mle}")
```

### Matrix free measurement mitigation (MTHREE)

> This method relies on inverting the probability distribution within an identified subspace [^3] (restricting to the space of measured bitstrings). The method is reserved for computations that exceed 20 qubits where trying to recreate the corrected probability distribution would be creating a state in a unreasonably high dimensional hilbert space. Thus the idea here is to stick to the basis states that show up in the measurement alone. Additionally one might want to include states that are k hamming distance away from it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method relies on inverting the probability distribution within a restricted subspace of measured bitstrings[^3]. The method is better suited for computations that exceed 20 qubits where the corrected probability distribution would require a state in a unreasonably high dimensional Hilbert space. Thus, the idea here is to stick to the basis states that show up in the measurement alone. Additionally, one might want to include states that are $k$ hamming distance away from it.
```

```

We have generated a probability distribution within a small subspace of bitstrings being filled. We use $csr\_matrix$ for efficient representation and computation. Now we use MTHREE to do mitigation on the probability distribution

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="m3" result="json"
from scipy.stats import wasserstein_distance
from qadence_protocols.mitigations.readout import (
    normalized_subspace_kron,
    mle_solve,
    matrix_inv, 
    tensor_rank_mult
    )

noise_matrices = []
for t in range(n_qubits):
    t_a, t_b = np.random.rand(2) / 8
    K = np.array([[1 - t_a, t_a], [t_b, 1 - t_b]]).transpose()  # column sum be 1
    noise_matrices.append(K)

confusion_matrix_subspace = normalized_subspace_kron(noise_matrices, observed_prob.nonzero()[0])

p_corr_mthree_gmres = gmres(confusion_matrix_subspace, input_csr.toarray())[0]
p_corr_mthree_gmres_mle = mle_solve(p_corr_mthree_gmres)

noise_matrices_inv = list(map(matrix_inv, noise_matrices))
p_corr_inv_mle = mle_solve(tensor_rank_mult(noise_matrices_inv, observed_prob))

print(wasserstein_distance(p_corr_mthree_gmres_mle, p_corr_inv_mle))

```

> We have used wassestein_distance instead of kl_divergence as many of the bistrings have 0 probabilites. If the expected solution lies outside the space of observed bistrings, MTHREE will fail. We next look at majority voting to circument this problem when the expected output is a single bitstring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have used `wassestein_distance` instead of `kl_divergence` as many of the bistrings have 0 probabilites. If the expected solution lies outside the space of observed bitstrings, `MTHREE` will fail. We next look at majority voting to circument this problem when the expected output is a single bitstring.
```

### Majority Voting

> Mitigiation protocol to be used only when the circuit output has a single expected bitstring as the solution [^4]. The method votes on the likeliness of each qubit to be a 0 or 1 assuming a tensor product structure for the output. The method is valid only when the readout errors are not correlated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mitigation protocol to be used only when the circuit output has a single expected bitstring as the solution[^4]. The method votes on the likeliness of each qubit to be a 0 or 1 assuming a tensor product structure for the output. The method is valid only when the readout errors are not correlated.
```

import numpy as np

# Simple circuit and observable construction.
n_qubits = 4
block = kron(*[I(i) for i in range(n_qubits)])
circuit = QuantumCircuit(n_qubits, block)
n_shots = 1000

# Construct a quantum model.
model = QuantumModel(circuit=circuit)

# Sampling the noisy solution
error_p = 0.2
noise = Noise(protocol=Noise.READOUT,options={"error_probability": error_p})
noisy_samples = model.sample(noise=noise, n_shots=n_shots)[0]

# Removing samples that correspond to actual solution
noisy_samples['0000'] = 0

# Constructing the probability vector
ordered_bitstrings = [bin(k)[2:].zfill(n_qubits) for k in range(2**n_qubits)]
observed_prob = np.array([noisy_samples[bs] for bs in ordered_bitstrings]) / n_shots

print(f"noisy samples: {noisy_samples}")
print(f"observed probability: {np.around(observed_prob,3)}")

```

We have removed the actual solution from the observed distribution and will use this as the observed probability.

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="mv" result="json"

noise_matrices = [np.array([[1 - error_p, error_p], [error_p, 1 - error_p]])]*n_qubits
print("mitigated solution index:", majority_vote(noise_matrices, observed_prob).argmax())
```

> ### Model free mitigation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Model free mitigation

```

> This protocol makes use of all possible twirl operations to average out the effect of readout errors into an effective scaling. The twirl operation consists of using bit flip operators before the measurement and after the measurement is obtained[^5]. The number of twirl operations can be reduced thru random sampling. The method is exact in that it requires no calibration which might be prone to errors of modelling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This protocol makes use of all possible twirl operations to average out the effect of readout errors into an effective scaling. The twirl operation consists of using bit flip operators before the measurement and after the measurement is obtained[^5]. The number of twirl operations can be reduced through random sampling. The method is exact in that it requires no calibration which might be prone to errors of modelling.
```

## Readout error mitigation

> Readout errors are introduced during measurements in the computation basis via probabilistic bitflips operators characterized by the readout matrix (also known as confusion matrix) defined over the system of qubits of dimension $2^n\times2^n$. The complete implementation of the mitigation technique involves using the characterized readout matrix for the system of qubits $(T)$ and classically applying an inversion  $(T^{−1})$ to the measured probability distributions. However there are several limitations of this approach:

Reviewer 2: Probabilistic bitflip instead of probabilistic bitflips?

- The complete implementation requires $2^n$ characterization experiments (probability measurements), which is not scalable.
- Classical overhead from full matrix inversion for large system of qubits is expensive
- The matrix $T$ may become singular for large $n$, preventing direct inversion.
- The inverse $T^{−1}$ might not be a stochastic matrix, meaning that it can produce negative corrected probabilities.
- The correction is not rigorously justified, so we cannot be sure that we are only removing SPAM errors and not otherwise corrupting an estimated probability distribution.

Qadence relies on the assumption of _uncorrelated_ readout errors, this gives us:

$$
T=T_1\otimes T_2\otimes \dots \otimes T_n
$$

for which the inversion is straightforward:

$$
T^{-1}=T_1^{-1}\otimes T_2^{-1}\otimes \dots \otimes T_n^{-1}
$$

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="mitigation" result="json"

> from qadence import QuantumModel, QuantumCircuit,hamiltonian_factory,kron, H, Z, I

Reviewer 2: same spacing nitpick

```

We have generated a probability distribution within a small subspace of bitstrings being filled. We use `csr_matrix` for efficient representation and computation. Now we use MTHREE to do mitigation on the probability distribution

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="m3" result="json"
from scipy.stats import wasserstein_distance
from qadence_protocols.mitigations.readout import (
    normalized_subspace_kron,
    mle_solve,
    matrix_inv,
    tensor_rank_mult
    )

noise_matrices = []
for t in range(n_qubits):
    t_a, t_b = np.random.rand(2) / 8
    K = np.array([[1 - t_a, t_a], [t_b, 1 - t_b]]).transpose()  # column sum be 1
    noise_matrices.append(K)

confusion_matrix_subspace = normalized_subspace_kron(noise_matrices, observed_prob.nonzero()[0])

p_corr_mthree_gmres = gmres(confusion_matrix_subspace, input_csr.toarray())[0]
p_corr_mthree_gmres_mle = mle_solve(p_corr_mthree_gmres)

noise_matrices_inv = list(map(matrix_inv, noise_matrices))
p_corr_inv_mle = mle_solve(tensor_rank_mult(noise_matrices_inv, observed_prob))

distance = wasserstein_distance(p_corr_mthree_gmres_mle, p_corr_inv_mle)

> print("Wassertein distance between the 2 distributions",distance)  # markdown-exec: hide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
print(f"Wasserstein distance between the 2 distributions: {distance}")  # markdown-exec: hide
```

```

> We have used `wassestein_distance` instead of `kl_divergence` as many of the bistrings have 0 probabilites. If the expected solution lies outside the space of observed bitstrings, `MTHREE` will fail. We next look at majority voting to circument this problem when the expected output is a single bitstring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have used `wasserstein_distance` instead of `kl_divergence` as many of the bistrings have 0 probabilites. If the expected solution lies outside the space of observed bitstrings, `MTHREE` will fail. We next look at majority voting to circument this problem when the expected output is a single bitstring.
```

# Simple circuit and observable construction.
n_qubits = 4
block = kron(*[I(i) for i in range(n_qubits)])
circuit = QuantumCircuit(n_qubits, block)
n_shots = 1000

# Construct a quantum model.
model = QuantumModel(circuit=circuit)

# Sampling the noisy solution
error_p = 0.2
noise = Noise(protocol=Noise.READOUT,options={"error_probability": error_p})
noisy_samples = model.sample(noise=noise, n_shots=n_shots)[0]

# Removing samples that correspond to actual solution
noisy_samples['0000'] = 0

# Constructing the probability vector
ordered_bitstrings = [bin(k)[2:].zfill(n_qubits) for k in range(2**n_qubits)]
observed_prob = np.array([noisy_samples[bs] for bs in ordered_bitstrings]) / n_shots

print(f"noisy samples: {noisy_samples}") # markdown-exec: hide
print(f"observed probability: {np.around(observed_prob,3)}") # markdown-exec: hide

```

We have removed the actual solution from the observed distribution and will use this as the observed probability.

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="mv" result="json"

noise_matrices = [np.array([[1 - error_p, error_p], [error_p, 1 - error_p]])]*n_qubits
result_index = majority_vote(noise_matrices, observed_prob).argmax()

> print("mitigated solution index:", result_index ) # markdown-exec: hide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
print(f"Mitigated solution index: {result_index}")  # markdown-exec: hide
```

```

### Model free mitigation

> This protocol makes use of all possible twirl operations to average out the effect of readout errors into an effective scaling. The twirl operation consists of using bit flip operators before the measurement and after the measurement is obtained[^5]. The number of twirl operations can be reduced through random sampling. The method is exact in that it requires no calibration which might be prone to errors of modelling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This protocol makes use of all possible so-called twirl operations to average out the effect of readout errors into an effective scaling. The twirl operation consists of using bit flip operators before the measurement and after the measurement is obtained[^5]. The number of twirl operations can be reduced through random sampling. The method is exact in that it requires no calibration which might be prone to errors of modelling.
```

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="mfm" result="json"
from qadence.measurements import Measurements
from qadence.noise.protocols import Noise
from qadence.operations import CNOT, RX, Z
from qadence_protocols.mitigations.protocols import Mitigations

import torch
from qadence import (
    QuantumCircuit,
    QuantumModel,
    chain,
    kron,
)

error_probability=0.15
n_shots=10000
block= chain(kron(RX(0, torch.pi / 3), RX(1, torch.pi / 6)), CNOT(0, 1))
observable=[3 * kron(Z(0), Z(1)) + 2 * Z(0)]

circuit = QuantumCircuit(block.n_qubits, block)
noise = Noise(protocol=Noise.READOUT, options={"error_probability": error_probability})
tomo_measurement = Measurements(
    protocol=Measurements.TOMOGRAPHY,
    options={"n_shots": n_shots},
)

model = QuantumModel(
    circuit=circuit, observable=observable,
)

noisy_model = QuantumModel(
    circuit=circuit,
    observable=observable,
    measurement=tomo_measurement,
    noise=noise,
)

> print("noiseless expectation value ", model.expectation(measurement=tomo_measurement,)) # markdown-exec: hide

Reviewer: Please use the string formatting syntax highlighted above.
